components/policy/resources/templates/policy_definitions/README.md, before:

## Policy Settings in Brave

These are Brave specific group policies.

Our official documentation is [available here](https://support.brave.com/hc/en-us/articles/360039248271-Group-Policy).

For information about adding a new policy, please see [this page](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:docs/enterprise/add_new_policy.md).

In a nutshell, the steps for adding a new policy in Brave look like this:

1. Create a new .yaml file under `//brave/components/policy/resources/templates/policy_definitions/BraveSoftware/`. The name of the file itself will be the policy name. Chromium uses capital casing. For example, we have a policy for disabling Brave Rewards called `BraveRewardsDisable.yaml`. The name used for matching is `BraveRewardsDisable`.
2. Update the properties in that file accordingly. You can look at some of the existing ones as an example OR you can [check out an example one that Chromium shares here](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:components/policy/resources/new_policy_templates/policy.yaml).
3. Go into `//brave/browser/policy/brave_simple_policy_map.h` and add your entry here. It'll be auto-generated as `policy::key::k` and then the policy name. With the above example, that would be `policy::key::kBraveRewardsDisable`. You must map this to a profile preference (you must create a new one). That new preference is what you'll check in the code.
4. In the code where you want to check the profile preference, you can tell if it's set via policy by checking `prefs->IsManagedPreference(<profile_preference_key_here>)`. If this is set to true, you might want to have the UI display something like `"This setting is managed by your organization"` and have it be read-only.
5. Build the project like regular (`npm run build`).
6. You can build the policy templates using `npm run build -- --target=brave/components/policy:pack_policy_templates`.
7. The group policy assets get output to `//out/<build_type_here>/brave_policy_templates.zip`. You can open this up and inspect the registry and adm/admx files. There is also a `policy_templates.zip` - that is the raw output before the script at `//brave/components/policy/pack_policy_templates.py` runs.

If rebuilding isn't picking up your policy, you can try to delete `//out/<build_type_here>/gen/components/policy/policy_constants.cc`. Rebuilding will trigger the rebuild for this file and your changes should be there.

Commit message:

List group policies in GN explicitly (#27246)
List group policies in GN explicitly.

components/policy/resources/templates/policy_definitions/README.md, after:

## Policy Settings in Brave

These are Brave specific group policies.

Our official documentation is [available here](https://support.brave.com/hc/en-us/articles/360039248271-Group-Policy).

For information about adding a new policy, please see [this page](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:docs/enterprise/add_new_policy.md).

In a nutshell, the steps for adding a new policy in Brave look like this:

1. Create a new .yaml file under `//brave/components/policy/resources/templates/policy_definitions/BraveSoftware/` and list it in `brave_policies.gni`. The name of the file itself will be the policy name. Chromium uses capital casing. For example, we have a policy for disabling Brave Rewards called `BraveRewardsDisable.yaml`. The name used for matching is `BraveRewardsDisable`.
2. Update the properties in that file accordingly. You can look at some of the existing ones as an example OR you can [check out an example one that Chromium shares here](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:components/policy/resources/new_policy_templates/policy.yaml).
3. Go into `//brave/browser/policy/brave_simple_policy_map.h` and add your entry here. It'll be auto-generated as `policy::key::k` and then the policy name. With the above example, that would be `policy::key::kBraveRewardsDisable`. You must map this to a profile preference (you must create a new one). That new preference is what you'll check in the code.
4. In the code where you want to check the profile preference, you can tell if it's set via policy by checking `prefs->IsManagedPreference(<profile_preference_key_here>)`. If this is set to true, you might want to have the UI display something like `"This setting is managed by your organization"` and have it be read-only.
5. Build the project like regular (`npm run build`).
6. You can build the policy templates using `npm run build -- --target=brave/components/policy:pack_policy_templates`.
7. The group policy assets get output to `//out/<build_type_here>/brave_policy_templates.zip`. You can open this up and inspect the registry and adm/admx files. There is also a `policy_templates.zip` - that is the raw output before the script at `//brave/components/policy/pack_policy_templates.py` runs.

If rebuilding isn't picking up your policy, you can try to delete `//out/<build_type_here>/gen/components/policy/policy_constants.cc`. Rebuilding will trigger the rebuild for this file and your changes should be there.
