ios/brave-ios/App/l10n/tools/README.md, before:

# How to contribute translations

There are several things you can do to help us internationalize Brave and provide a great experience for everybody

## Providing a translation

We manage all of our translations using Transifex. Here's how you can get started:
- [Create an account](https://www.transifex.com/signup/?join_project=brave-ios) with Transifex (it's free!)
- During the setup, it'll ask if you want to start your own project or join an existing project. Choose to join an existing project.
- Transifex will ask which languages you speak; filling this in is appreciated so that we have an accurate snapshot of the languages our contributors are familiar with.
- At this point, your account will be created and you can confirm your email.

You are now ready to join and help with translations or you can request a new language.
- Visit https://www.transifex.com/brave/brave-ios/
- In the top right, you can click "Join team".
- You can specify the languages you speak OR request a language which is not currently provided
- One of our contributors will be able to approve your access.

## How does translated text get back into the GitHub repository?
We generally pull in all languages files at the time we cut a release. That allows us to keep everything up to date in a scalable way.
For reference, here are a few pull requests where we've pulled in new language files

- https://github.com/brave/brave-ios/pull/???

## Making sure our code has all strings localized

### Prerequisites

* Open the Terminal application
* Type ```sudo easy_install pip```
* Type ```sudo -H pip install tornado```
* Type ```sudo -H pip install lxml```

Besides providing the actual translations themselves, it's important that the code tokenizes all strings shown to the user.

### Fixing existing known issues

You can search our existing issues and find places to contribute here:
https://github.com/brave/brave-ios/labels/l10n

### Properly modifying a string

Different files are used by different parts of the code. If you're not sure which file to edit, you should do a search or grep using another string in the same code you're looking at.

### Properly adding a new string

New strings should be statically added to the Strings.swift file in the `en_US` locale like so:

```
extension Strings {
    public static let someString = NSLocalizedString("SomeString", value: "Some String", comment: "Comments are used to bring context to the string to aide others")
}
```

These string changes can then be pushed to Transifex for translation by running the following from Terminal:

```
cd l10n/
USERNAME=<username> PASSWORD=<password> ./push-strings-to-transifex.sh
```

If there any issues pushing strings to Transifex then these issues are logged to ```output.log```

### How Transifex handles updates

Please check [what happens when you update files](https://docs.transifex.com/projects/updating-content#what-happens-when-you-update-files)
 in order to have an overall view of how Transifex handles updates of a source file.

### Referencing that new string

Inside your Swift code, you can get the localized values like so:

```
let someString = Strings.someString
```

### Importing the latest translations

You can import the latest translations from Transifex into the project by running the following from Terminal:

```
cd l10n/
USERNAME=<username> PASSWORD=<password> ./pull-translations-into-project.sh
```

If there any issues pulling translations into the Xcode project then these issues are logged to ```output.log```

**IMPORTANT:** Before importing the latest translations, please take a moment to look at [How does translated text get back into the GitHub repository?](#how-does-translated-text-get-back-into-the-github-repository?)

### Known limitations

* When importing translations the ```xcodebuild``` command-line tool:
    * does __not__ allow us to specify where localizations are imported into the project folder structure
    * adds duplicate .strings entries to the ```Copy Bundle Resources``` section of ```Build Phases```, which need to be manually removed

Commit message:

feat(ios): Add a script to push localization resource file to Crowdin (#27230)

ios/brave-ios/App/l10n/tools/README.md, after:

# How to push strings to Crowdin

### Prerequisites
This script is using bash jq command-line tool for parsing JSON data.
Make sure jq is installed and added to your PATH
 
Once your english strings are all up to date. These changes can be pushed to Crowdin for translation by running the following from Terminal:

```
cd l10n/
TOKEN=<token> ./push-strings-to-crowdin.sh
```

If there any issues pushing strings to Transifex then these issues are logged to ```output.log```

### Note
The API token can be created from Crowdin Dev Portal 

# How to contribute translations via Transifex

There are several things you can do to help us internationalize Brave and provide a great experience for everybody

## Providing a translation

We manage all of our translations using Transifex. Here's how you can get started:
- [Create an account](https://www.transifex.com/signup/?join_project=brave-ios) with Transifex (it's free!)
- During the setup, it'll ask if you want to start your own project or join an existing project. Choose to join an existing project.
- Transifex will ask which languages you speak; filling this in is appreciated so that we have an accurate snapshot of the languages our contributors are familiar with.
- At this point, your account will be created and you can confirm your email.

You are now ready to join and help with translations or you can request a new language.
- Visit https://www.transifex.com/brave/brave-ios/
- In the top right, you can click "Join team".
- You can specify the languages you speak OR request a language which is not currently provided
- One of our contributors will be able to approve your access.

## How does translated text get back into the GitHub repository?
We generally pull in all languages files at the time we cut a release. That allows us to keep everything up to date in a scalable way.
For reference, here are a few pull requests where we've pulled in new language files

- https://github.com/brave/brave-ios/pull/???

## Making sure our code has all strings localized

### Prerequisites

* Open the Terminal application
* Type ```sudo easy_install pip```
* Type ```sudo -H pip install tornado```
* Type ```sudo -H pip install lxml```

Besides providing the actual translations themselves, it's important that the code tokenizes all strings shown to the user.

### Fixing existing known issues

You can search our existing issues and find places to contribute here:
https://github.com/brave/brave-ios/labels/l10n

### Properly modifying a string

Different files are used by different parts of the code. If you're not sure which file to edit, you should do a search or grep using another string in the same code you're looking at.

### Properly adding a new string

New strings should be statically added to the Strings.swift file in the `en_US` locale like so:

```
extension Strings {
    public static let someString = NSLocalizedString("SomeString", value: "Some String", comment: "Comments are used to bring context to the string to aide others")
}
```

These string changes can then be pushed to Transifex for translation by running the following from Terminal:

```
cd l10n/
USERNAME=<username> PASSWORD=<password> ./push-strings-to-transifex.sh
```

If there any issues pushing strings to Transifex then these issues are logged to ```output.log```

### How Transifex handles updates

Please check [what happens when you update files](https://docs.transifex.com/projects/updating-content#what-happens-when-you-update-files)
 in order to have an overall view of how Transifex handles updates of a source file.

### Referencing that new string

Inside your Swift code, you can get the localized values like so:

```
let someString = Strings.someString
```

### Importing the latest translations

You can import the latest translations from Transifex into the project by running the following from Terminal:

```
cd l10n/
USERNAME=<username> PASSWORD=<password> ./pull-translations-into-project.sh
```

If there any issues pulling translations into the Xcode project then these issues are logged to ```output.log```

**IMPORTANT:** Before importing the latest translations, please take a moment to look at [How does translated text get back into the GitHub repository?](#how-does-translated-text-get-back-into-the-github-repository?)

### Known limitations

* When importing translations the ```xcodebuild``` command-line tool:
    * does __not__ allow us to specify where localizations are imported into the project folder structure
    * adds duplicate .strings entries to the ```Copy Bundle Resources``` section of ```Build Phases```, which need to be manually removed
