# TREZOR REFERENCE SOURCE LICENSE (T-RSL)

This license governs use of the accompanying software. If you use the software,
you accept this license. If you do not accept the license, do not use the
software.

## 1. Definitions

The terms "reproduce," "reproduction" and "distribution" have the same meaning
here as under U.S. copyright law.

"You" means the licensee of the software.

"Your company" means the company you worked for when you downloaded the
software.

"Reference use" means use of the software within your company as a reference,
in read only form, for the sole purposes of debugging your products,
maintaining your products, or enhancing the interoperability of your products
with the software, and specifically excludes the right to distribute the
software outside of your company.

"Licensed patents" means any Licensor patent claims which read directly on the
software as distributed by the Licensor under this license.

## 2. Grant of Rights

(A) Copyright Grant - Subject to the terms of this license, the Licensor grants
you a non-transferable, non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free copyright
license to reproduce the software for reference use.

(B) Patent Grant - Subject to the terms of this license, the Licensor grants
you a non-transferable, non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free patent license
under licensed patents for reference use.

## 3. Limitations

(A) No Trademark License - This license does not grant you any rights to use
the Licensor's name, logo, or trademarks.

(B) If you begin patent litigation against the Licensor over patents that you
think may apply to the software (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in
a lawsuit), your license to the software ends automatically.

(C) The software is licensed "as-is." You bear the risk of using it. The
Licensor gives no express warranties, guarantees or conditions. You may have
additional consumer rights under your local laws which this license cannot
change. To the extent permitted under your local laws, the Licensor excludes
the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and
non-infringement.
